#How Did I Get Here? GPS, Surveillance Culture, and Personal Narrative

On the 4th of December, 2013, a mysterious woman known only as Atrio descended into the maelstrom of snow and ice surrounding the isolated village of Iliamna, Alaska. A census-designated place of 109, Iliamna was suddenly an important hub in a global struggle, and Atrio was braving the elements to land at the packed gravel runway of Merrill Field in a single-engine chartered Cessna. According to the account of the action posted online later, the plane landed and the pilot informed Atrio that a 30-minute window existed before the plane and its passenger would be stranded for days in the middle of the Alaskan wilderness.

With snow bearing down, Atrio waited with increased agitation for her mobile phone's GPS to penetrate the caustic and stinging weather and sync with a satellite that may or may not be in range in the isolated northern wastes of America's "Last Frontier." With literally seconds remaining, Atrio finally managed to simulataneously acquire a GPS signal and the village's meager 2G cellular network. Thus connected to the rest of the globe, she hastily completed her work and jumped into the waiting plane. Despite her pilot's warning that they might not be able to safely take off, with the storm bearing down upon them, the small plane buffeted into the air and escaped back to Anchorage and back to civilization, Atrio's mission successfully completed.[^alaska-account]

All of this may sound a bit like a spy novel, and I don't think that comparison is entirely off base. Was, you may ask, Atrio working for an oil company, seeking new ways to extract fossil fuels from the harsh North? A government agent, perhaps, setting up a piece of equipment to spy on Russia across the Bering Strait? Did any of this even actually happen, you might also ask?

That last question, following the classic virtual / actual divide with which many Americans approach virtual worlds is perhaps "kind of." Atrio, you see, is not the codename of a CIA spy or the handle of an agent of corporate espionage. Instead, she is a player in the increasingly popular alternate-reality game, Ingress, developed and maintained by the Google internal start-up, Niantic Labs. The game's backstory posits a global struggle between a conspiratorial Enlightened and a plucky Resistance. Like other ARGs, however, the game is played as a hybrid between mobile devices and the physical world.

In the specific model of Ingress, players compete to form triangles between Portals, which positioned around the globe often at points of interest such as memorials and public artwork. In order to capture these portals, though, a player must phsyically interact with the virtual game space by means of uploaded GPS coordinates. And this need is what led to Atrio's daring action in Iliamna. By capturing the point for the Enlightened, Atrio not only secured that Portal but was able to capture much of the Western coast of the US, completing a triangle that encompassed all of California. Given the difficulty of accessing this specific portal, this capture marked a stunning coup for players of the Enlightened faction.

I tell this story as an introduction to my talk today, because, besides being a totally awesome example of what William Gibson has termed as the Internet "extruding," I think it highlights a fascinating nexus of narrative writing, surveillance, and multimodal composition.[^gibson-spook] I am interested in GPS-driven systems such as Ingress because they highlight a new and exciting emergent spatial writing that disrupts the widely-held view that space supplements but does not supplant writing. Ingress, by gamifying the act of being tracked by your phone's GPS, also dramatizes the tensions surrounding cellphone-based surveillance recently exposed by John Snowden. As I'll be addressing in the remainder of my talk today, I am interested in the ways in which surveillance and tracking can be converted into the raw materials of a valorizing narrative. More specifically, I am interested in thinking through how this might inform the genre of personal narrative within the composition classroom.

## Psychogeography

Scot Barnett's webtext, "Psychogeographies of Writing," offers an accounting of space similar to the one I'll be foregrounding in this talk. For Barnett, the critical spatial theory that has dominated the last few years of rhet-comp scholarship

> may be well-suited to help us critique space and spatial praxis from within a historical materialist framework, it has a great deal less to offer when it comes to examining other aspects of spatiality—including ... those “pre-reflective” (i.e. pre-theoretical, pre-representational, and pre-ideological) aspects of our embodied being-in-the-world—that, because they often fail to register at the level of conscious consideration, tend to belie critique’s abilities to demystify spatial relations and bring them under the regime of a concept capable of being known and represented within various symbolic structures.[^barnett-psychogeographies]

For Barnett, these "pre-reflective" aspects of being-in-the-world (and I'll stop using Phenomenological terminology from here on out. You're welcome.) are captured on an unconscious level that exceeds our ability to represent. Barnett further argues that technologies, such as the usage of a combined Galvanic Skin Response (GSR) and Global Positioning System (GPS) in Christian Nold’s Bio Mapping project discussed by Barnett. In that project, participants are connected to a GSR device to measure fluctuations in stress and other indicators of emotional being at the same time that there perambulations through the city are mapped using GPS. At the completion of this mapping, Noid interviews these subjects to determine the relationship between space and emotion.

This second level of meaning-making interests me here. For Barnett, following Noid's lead, these kind of unconscious explorations (what the Situationists called "psychogeographies") allow us to "engage the pre-reflective, pre-ideological affects that _underwrite_ our (i.e., our students’ and our own) decision-making abilities."[^barnett-psychogeographies] Barnett's usage of "underwrite" is what troubles me about his account of psychogeography. For Barnett, the unconscious movement through space represents _inventio_, the moment of exploration that underscores the act of writing.

Barnett's account of psychogeography and writing supposedly articulates "a worldview that doesn't presume the possibility of coherence or recuperation but that rather recognizes and affirms the ultimate otherness and irreducibility of one’s embodied being-in-the-world" and yet, at the same time, the goal of exploration and mapping is to still produce a written narrative, however open to partiality it is.[^barnett-psychogeographies] I began, in contrast, with a story about Ingress because I'm interested in the way that GPS itself and interactions with space as such are driving emergent, global narratives. While I obviously narrativized Atrio's capture, this was already a metanarrative: the game itself, composed of spatial experiences, is already narrativizing. Where is the space for Barnett's methodology of "working-through" within this account? With the rich possibilities of GPS to tell us our stories, why must we be bound by ideas of essay and narrative within the composition classroom?

## Distant Reading

## Surveillance

I mention all of this to highlight the narratives that are already being distant written about us. Dramatizing this in the comic strip "Tom the Dancing Bug," a man named Gavin Smythe joins the loyalty club at his local "Fried Donut" franchise and, because of his bad handwriting, gets entered into the company's system as "Gamal Singh." Men in dark suits arrest him as he continues to remind them that his name is Smith and that he has "nothing to hide" from "government surveillance." Soon, the $250 he made selling "NFL-themed beanie babies on eBay," his copying of a Michael Bolton CD "in 2005," his visiting a website called "www.suburbanmilfs1.com" in 2009, and his texting "about to blow up" (in reference to the "really spicy burrito" he'd eaten for lunch) while driving by a federal office building are all seen as evidence of his guilt as he progresses from being interrogated, to being tried in a secret tribunal, to being transported to Guantanamo, to finally, three years later, looking forward to his weekly cavity search.[^tom-the-dancing-bug]

The comic strip draws humor from the increasingly pervasive digital surveillance that makes up what Bruce Sterling calls the Terrorism-Entertainment-Complex. However, the rendition of Gavin Smythe as Gamal Singh reminds us how much the principle role of the massive surveillance being performed by groups such as the NSA are fundamentally about narrative. Through happenstance, Smythe becomes Singh and suddenly a host of innocent facts are assembled to paint the picture of a monster.

This kind of narrativizing is of course all too much a reality. According to the EFF, the NSA's supercomputers for performing deep packet analysis on all the information illegally acquired in their warrantless wire-tapping were "capable of analyzing 10 gigabits of IP packets, and 2.5 gigabits of web traffic or email, per second" in 2011 (and that capacity has only likely increased).[^eff-nsa-spying] Additionally, this capacity has led to "between 15 and 20 trillion" unique transactions being collected since 2001 and stored in the NSA's $2 billion server-farm in Utah. Beyond the kind of archives of the European novel distant-read by DH scholars such as Moretti, this is the ultimate distant reading archive.

The narrative of Smythe/Singh is being composed, as I suggested earlier, at this distance, by tracing subtextual units through supertextual networks. In mapping Moretti's language to NSA surveillance, the textual that gets lost in distant reading is our interior (which, as post-humanists we purport to not care about, right?). To loop back to Barnett's account of psychogeography, then, where is the place for personal narrative here? The composition of a personal narrative from GPS evidence tames an incomplete and fragmentary tangle of data into the cliched and precious interiority of life-writing that so dominates the artistic landscape of our inhuman age. The danger of being interested in automatic writing and digital psychogeography in the age of mass surveillance is that we risk celebrating as liberating the technologies that only further reinscribe our encaging by networks of power.

Why does it matter at all about the emotional interior of the subject of surveillance? The common defense against NSA mass surveillance is, as Smythe reiterates, "I have nothing to hide, surveillance doesn't effect me." The problem, we face, though, again as illustrated by this strip, is we are often unsure what the narrative being composed from our subtextual actions says about us as texts of juridical power. In our new life as data, are we (our students, our colleagues, all of us) the best authors of our personal narratives?

All of this leaves me at a bit of an impasse. Before working through this presentation, I was all about the idea of using psychogeography as means of assembling personal narrative, revealing the unconscious ways in which our students inscribe their lives through space. I still think that texts like Ingress can be made to valorize the pervasive surveillance culture in which we move. Additionally, I think the important thing to learn from Ingress is the role of collective authorship in these narratives. Barnett's call to personal reflection merely valorizes the individual as the arbiter of experience. As I've hopefully shown here, however, in this age of distant writing, we are not always the only or even the most important authors of our experience.

To leave you with something practical for the classroom, I'm increasingly thinking about using a GPS-driven composition assignment in which students switch GPS data and write narratives about their classmates. There are obvious privacy implications here, so I'm not entirely sure how to implement this in the classroom, but juxtaposing what students think is happening in their lives and what a party-at-a-distance thinks seems to be at getting at the ominous stacks of our new lives as data.

### Thank you.

[^1]: http://kotaku.com/a-game-youd-go-to-the-ends-of-the-earth-to-play-1477461390
[^alaska-account]: https://plus.google.com/115004541265703011922/posts/SGVNx9TmhFc
[^gibson-spook]: Gibson, William. _Spook Country_.
[^barnett-psychogeographies]: http://kairos.technorhetoric.net/16.3/topoi/barnett/index.html
[^tom-the-dancing-bug]: http://boingboing.net/2013/06/25/tom-the-dancing-bug-chagrin-f.html
[^predictive-policing]: http://www.governing.com/blogs/bfc/col-crime-fighting-predictive-policing-data-tools.html
[^moretti-conjectures]: http://newleftreview.org/II/1/franco-moretti-conjectures-on-world-literature
[^eff-nsa-spying]: https://www.eff.org/nsa-spying/how-it-works